---
title: Op-Ed
categories:
feature_image: /assets/images/blog/student_on_computer.png
---

**Closing the Digital Gap Using Open Source Technologies: Lessons Learned Building a Low Cost Tech Centre in Rural Eastern Cape**

In 2005, a [United Nations backed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One_Laptop_per_Child) initiative aimed to change the developing world through technology. By endeavouring to create a $100 computer for developing countries, with limited electricity and internet connection, One Laptop per Child [(OLPC)](https://www.onelaptopperchild.org/) set out to bring world class education to the world's poorest areas. The project was a spectacular failure. The laptop [cost more than $200](https://www.theverge.com/2018/4/16/17233946/olpcs-100-laptop-education-where-is-it-now), the software was buggy and the clunky machine often broke down - with little technical support to fix it. Today, the OLPC remains a key case study for why technology alone is not adequate to solve difficult development challenges. 

Despite this, OLPCs vision is not wrong. The [Bulungula Incubator](https://bulungulaincubator.org) is based in Xhora Mouth in the deep rural Eastern Cape, one of the poorest areas in South Africa. Here, there is no electricity, limited infrastructure and treacherous dirt roads. Educational and employment outcomes amplify the consequences of poor service delivery. In Xhora Mouth, youth unemployment is above 90 percent and barely five percent of adults finish high school. It is not likely that the youth of Xhora Mouth will have access to the same educational facilities, teachers, resources or tools that urban areas have anytime soon. 

For instance, one of the programmes we run at the Bulungula Incubator is a Job Skills and Entrepreneurship Programme. While we have grand ambitions for the skills we hope that participants will gain, our biggest constraint is that the material we deliver is limited to the skills in our immediate vicinity or to pay for an external facilitator to travel to Bulungula - an expensive journey. Imagine if our youth could learn about data capturing, data science or social entrepreneurship? Imagine if they could watch youtube videos about the latest permaculture techniques or learn how to build furniture for homes in the area? Imagine if they could apply for NSFAS funding, technicons, universities or online diplomas without having to travel hours to the nearest city? In such a context, technology really does hold the potential to scalably bring a world of knowledge and opportunities to the youth at a fraction of the cost. With the failures of OLPC consistently at the back of our minds, we set out to build a low-cost, sustainable tech centre in Xhora Mouth. 

When setting out on this mission, there were a myriad of factors to consider. Without electricity how would we run the centre? Should we use PCs, laptops or tablets? How do we work around high data costs? What software is most appropriate? How do we maintain and troubleshoot the centre with very few people in the community ever having used a computer before? How do we ensure that the technology does not go into a dusty cupboard once we leave? Luckily, it has been 15 years since OLPC built their computer and a lot has changed since then. 

Given the electricity and budget constraints, the devices that would be used in the center was a key consideration. We looked into using PCs, laptops, tablets and more. However, there was one overwhelming winner, the [Raspberry Pi (RPi)](https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/). It ticked all the boxes: it is energy-efficient, using far less power than other computers; it is substantially cheaper than even the cheapest PCs (forget the OLPC’s $200 computers, the RPi only costs R1000); despite this, it contains enough memory and computational power to ensure a complete desktop experience; and lastly, there is a thriving community of developers contributing towards software that is free to use and constantly improving.

Once we had settled on using RPis, we needed to determine how they would be configured and connected to enable the networking functionality expected from a computer lab (user logins, personal files etc.). This is where the open-source community around the RPis came to the fore. The [Raspberry Pi Foundation](https://www.raspberrypi.org/about/) has developed, and continues to support, a tool called [piserver](https://www.raspberrypi.org/blog/piserver/) which converted our networking problem into a ‘plug and play’ exercise. We simply had to install the software onto a central PC and connect the RPis on a local network. The Raspberry Pi desktop interface is based on linux and  is very intuitive to use compared to other operating systems - a key consideration for a community where most residents have never used a computer before. 

Due to the exorbitant data prices in South Africa, we had to consider a way to facilitate the sharing of learning materials to the students without burdening the school with the cost of downloading these materials from the internet. Once again, open-source software was the solution - we decided to use [Kolibri](https://learningequality.org/kolibri/), a free offline digital-learning platform developed by the [Learning Equality Foundation](https://learningequality.org). To reduce our reliance on high-speed internet we can put learning material onto a flash drive and physically transport it to the learning center. Kolibri makes it easy to upload learning material from a flash drive to the tech-center. Kolibri aptly calls this form of information distribution “sneakernet”. Once the learning material is on the central PC, the students can easily access the material from any of the connected RPis. Kolibri also makes it possible for teachers to set up digital quizzes, giving the students a fully-fledged digital learning experience (think an offline Coursera). 

A final consideration was how to ensure the sustainability of the lab after we leave. It is not uncommon for a project like this to end in the devices being put away into a cupboard, never to be used again. In order to mitigate this, we started by developing a Guide for the center which outlines how to set up the center from scratch, how to facilitate the day-to-day operations of the center, and how to troubleshoot issues that might arise. To accompany the Guide, we employed and trained (using the Guide) two passionate young individuals from the community as part-time employees to run the center. However, there are software-related issues that are outside of the scope of the Guide and the expertise of the center administrators. Thus, we enabled the ability to remotely access the central PC allowing us to assist with the software-side of the center from wherever we are.

As you can see from the past technology-related paragraphs, we leaned heavily on open-source software, reducing the cost of the lab significantly. Hopefully, this improves the reproducibility of the lab, allowing others to affordably create labs of a similar kind.

Technology is not the silver bullet to development. Alone, it will not revolutionise rural South Africa and lift its residents out of poverty. But, with the right facilitation, hardware, software, content, and partnerships; it does kindle a flame of hope to play a small part in doing so. 


